# XPS packages
  this suite of packages should contain tools for the estimation of the concentration profiles of a  chemical species across a microjet (i.e. a very small stream) probed with X-rays. The data are the spectra of the emitted photoelectrons from the core subshell in the ground state (i.e. 1s orbital).

The package is divided into three:

- XPSpack:     model (deterministic and associated uncertainty)
- XPSinv:      some inversion methods (or these could be taken from another package, and only included in this package)
- XPSsampling: estimate the covariance of the posterior distribution being optimized by XPSinv

The repository can be found at [XPSinv](https://github.com/Center-for-Atmospheric-Research-ATMOS/XPS-depth-inv)

## Model: XPSpack
Two models are implemented in this module; both are modelling the photoelectric signal generated by photoelectron emitted from C1s in a microjet and collected at an angle by a kinetic energy analyzer.
### Single point spectrum
The PE point model describes each data point collected by a kinetic energy analyzer with solid angular aperture &alpha; and gain T. It takes into account the total photon current F(h&nu;)&sigma;(h&nu;,Ke) and the attenuation of the amount of electrons depending on the depth at which the electron is emitted through an integral term spanning  the depth of the target -- the photon attenuation is not accounted for since it is negligible in the relevant cases. It assumes that the background signal (e.g. fluorescence, inelastic electron scattering, etc) has already been extracted using a baseline removal algorithm (e.g. that implemented by the function baseline_removal in XPSutils.jl). The intensity measured for an photon of energy h&nu; and a electron emitted with kinetic energy Ke is given by [1]:

I(h&nu;,Ke) - I<sub>bg</sub>(h&nu;,Ke) = &alpha;T(&mu;<sub>Ke</sub>) F(h&nu;)&sigma;(h&nu;,Ke) &int;<sub>&Omega;</sub> &rho;<sub>A</sub>(x,y,z) e<sup>-d(x,y,z)&frasl;&lambda;(Ke)</sup> dxdydz +  &epsilon;(h&nu;,Ke)

where d is the function that gives the relative amount of matter the emitted electron has to go through depending on the depth -- asymptotically, it is equivalent to the simple distance.
The term &epsilon;(h&nu;,Ke) is a stochastic term that describes the measurement noise due to uncontrolled parameters -- it can also include uncertainty due to the deterministic term of the model itself when inverting the data.

The deterministic part of the model is implemented by the function  &Psi;_lin_peak in the XPSmeas.jl file. The covariance of the uncertainty related to the attenuation length is computed by the function cov_H_cylinder. #TODO: The rest of the uncertainty still needs to be implemented

In this model, the effect of the analyzer is reduced to two parameters &alpha; and T. As much as the angular aperture is a good model for the integration of the angular density of the isotropic orbital 1s, the factor T might not be as good of a model. Indeed, the mechanisms by which the kinetic energy spectrum is collected, see [2] for an overview of principles, are probably more complex than just the multiplication by the factor T; however, for fine enough resolution and discrimination power, the complexity of the analyzer may be well approximated by a single multiplicative factor.

### Peaks
The spectra collected during an experiment involving organic compounds other that single isolated atom of carbons is usually made up of several overlapping peaks which can be attributed different carbon atoms in the molecules. Several reasons can explain why the signal is not concentrated at a single point in the kinetic energy spectrum:

- chemical shift
- satellites lines
- exchange/relaxation

among others. The interesting feature is that the spread and shift in kinetic energy space can be attributed to the potential energy terms in the Hamiltonian that does not involve the 1s orbital. It is the interaction between the 1s electron and the field created by the other electrons (including the valence electrons, those "binding" with the neighboring atom) that determines the spectral shape of the ionization cross section [3].
NOTE: In this package, we do not aim at creating a predictive model for the cross section spectral shape, but it is estimated from the spectra.

The spectral shape and the different peaks (the number of peak must be known/assumed) can be computed with the functions

- EM_peaks
- cross_section_spread_function and cross_section_spread_function_sample

implemented in the file XPSutils.jl. Later on they will be moved to the inversion module of the package.
man! Am I not creative when it comes to name functions!

### Peak area
An often used quantity  is the peak area, by which it is meant that the spectrum created by a specific neighborhood around a site, e.g. 1s orbital of a C atom surrounded by another carbon, one oxygen and one hydrogen, is a quantity that depends on the concentration of said configuration. It is defined by:

A(h&nu;, &mu;<sub>Ke</sub>) = &int; I(h&nu;,Ke) - I<sub>bg</sub>(h&nu;,Ke) dKe

Note that it is less sensitive to the measurement noise than single point spectra (but there are considerably fewer data points for an algorithm to invert the data once integrated).

### Relative peak area
In some cases, some parameters are not known, e.g. the analyzer characteristics or the photon flux. Another useful quantity is then the ratio of two different compounds taken measured for the same kinetic energy ranges; in this case, the ratio will cancel out the factor &alpha;T.
One very interesting case is the ratio involving C1s and O1s signals. Indeed, the ionization cross section for these atoms are well defined and tabulated, e.g. see [4], and the bulk of the O1s signal can be approximated by the solvent signal (in case of dilute aqueous solutions) whose concentration w.r.t. depth can be approximated by a step function (for O1s, g(z) = z, and &rho;<sub>H2O 1s</sub>(z) = &rho;<sub>0</sub> for z>0 and 0 otherwise).

R<sub>C1s,O1s</sub>(h&nu;<sub>1</sub>, &mu;<sub>Ke<sub>1</sub></sub>,h&nu;<sub>2</sub>, &mu;<sub>Ke<sub>2</sub></sub>) = A<sub>C1s</sub>(h&nu;<sub>1</sub>, &mu;<sub>Ke<sub>1</sub></sub>)/A<sub>O1s</sub>(h&nu;<sub>2</sub>, &mu;<sub>Ke<sub>2</sub></sub>)

NOTE: the relative area is not implemented as such in the package, but rather derive from the PE signal model and implemented in examples.

### Geometry of the sample
The XPSpack package propses several geometries for the sample depending on the level of approximation and the actual shape of the sample, one may choose in the following options:
- beam/finger: is the zeroth order approxiamtion of any experiment and does not bear much physical information (the signal is assumed to be focused along a beam in the sample, ignoring the rest of the signal)
- plane: this is probably a good approximation for all experiments involving a flat sample/vaccum interface
- cylinder: well suited for liquid microjet samples

## Inversion: XPSinv

### inversion algorithms

- Null Space Optimization [5]: seems to work for simple cases, but not for all cases (probably going to be deprecated soon since it does not provide a clear advantage over CP)
- Chambolle and Pock (CP) Primal-Dual optimization [6] is somewhat more time consuming but the results are more consistent (but they are not really time consuming so far) The advantage of this algorithm is that it relies on fairly simple formula contrary to other more intuitive algorithms.

### Sampling

The data and the measurement model can be sampled so that the uncertainty due to measurement noise and parameter uncertainty can be assessed in the final result, i.e. the concentration profile

## Posterior density sampling
In the package XPSsampling, you will find a Metropolis Hastings [7,8] implementation of the sampler. The point here is to be able to estimate the covariance of the distribution to give an idea of the uncertainty of the profile estimate due to the Bayesian formulation. Note that it is different from the variability due to the noise in the data -- this can be estimated if one knows the noise level in the data.
## Examples

### Geometry
compare the different sample geometries, based on XPSpack
[link to file](test/geom.jl)

### Inversion
- inversion using the strong conditional P(&rho;|y,H) and weak formulation P(&rho;|y) and sampling of the two posteriors [link to file](test/profileEstimation.jl)
- inversion using only the strong conditional P(&rho;|y,H), but the marginalization leading to the weak formulation is done by sampling the measurement operator space [link to file](test/profileEstimationSampleMarg.jl)

### data simulation and measurement operator
the source of all data in the latest development is coded in [link to file](data/dataGenAndSave.jl)

<!--- 
### data_generation_exp.jl

Test for:

- baseline removal
- peak fitting
- PE model
- data generation (simulation)
- data inversion: some test for PE signal using some version of sampling the data and the model

[link to file](test/data_generation_exp.jl)

### test_all.jl

Test focusing on the inversion of simulated PE signal with all the inversion methods currently implemented

[link to file](test/test_all.jl)

### peak_area_model.jl

Test focusing on the inversion of simulated peak area data

[link to file](test/peak_area_model.jl)

### data_gen_exp_5.jl

Test for:

- baseline removal
- cross section spectral shape (estimate and uncertainty)
- PE and peak area model (and uncertainty)
- simulation of some data

[link to file](test/data_gen_exp_5.jl)
--->

## Refs

- [1] N. Ottosson et al., Photoelectron spectroscopy of liquid water and aqueous solution: Electron effective attenuation lengths and emission-angle anisotropy, Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena, 2012, Vol. 177, p. 60 ([DOI: 10.1016/j.elspec.2009.08.007](https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.elspec.2009.08.007))
- [2] D. Roy and D. Tremblay, Design of electron spectrometers, Reports on Progress in Physics, 1990, Vol. 53, No. 12, p. 1621 ([DOI: 10.1088/0034-4885/53/12/003](https://www.doi.org/10.1088/0034-4885/53/12/003))
- [3] S. Manson and J. Cooper, Photo-Ionization in the Soft x-Ray Range: 1 Z Dependence in a Central-Potential Model, Physical Review, 1968, Vol. 165, p. 126 ([DOI: 10.1103/PhysRev.165.126](https://www.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.165.126))
- [4] J. Yeh and I. Lindau, Atomic subshell photoionization cross sections and asymmetry parameters: 1⩽ Z⩽ 103, 1985, Vol. 32, No. 1, p. 1--155, ([DOI: 10.1016/0092-640X(85)90016-6](https://www.doi.org/10.1016/0092-640X\(85\)90016-6))
- [5] D. Stolzenburg, M. Ozon, M.  Kulmala, K. Lehtinen, K. Lehtipalo and J. Kangasluoma, 2022, Combining instrument inversions for sub-10 nm aerosol number size-distribution measurements, Journal of Aerosol Science, Vol. 159, p. 105862, [DOI: 10.1016/j.jaerosci.2021.105862](https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2021.105862)
- [6] A. Chambolle and T. Pock, 2011. A first-order primal-dual algorithm for convex problems with applications to imaging. Journal of mathematical imaging and vision, 40(1), pp.120-145, [DOI: 10.1007/s10851-010-0251-1](https://www.doi.org/10.1007/s10851-010-0251-1)
- [7] N. Metropolis et S. Ulam, The Monte Carlo method,  Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 44, no 247, 1949, p. 335–341, [DOI: 10.2307/2280232](https://www.doi.org/10.2307/2280232)
- [8] W.K. Hastings, Monte Carlo Sampling Methods Using Markov Chains and Their Applications, Biometrika, vol. 57, no 1, 1970, p. 97–109, [DOI: 10.2307/2334940](https://www.doi.org/10.2307/2334940)

# Dependence

- Interpolations
- utilsFun (not anymore)
- TODO: add the rest of the deps (in Project.toml files)

# Users may store their own personal commands in `~/.julia/config/startup.jl`.
